SETTLED OVER THE CAPITOL, AS
LAWMAKERS CONTINUED TO HUNKER
DOWN IN THEIR POSITIONS WITH THE
GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN ENTERING ITS
SEVENTH DAY.
GOOD EVENING.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
GWEN IFILL IS OFF TONIGHT.
ALSO AHEAD THIS MONDAY, A KEY
AL-QAEDA OPERATIVE CAPTURED IN
LIBYA IS BEING INTERROGATED BY
THE U.S. AFTER TWIN RAIDS
AGAINST TERRORISTS IN NORTH
AFRICA OVER THE WEEKEND.
AND FROM PAKISTAN, A STORY OF
SETBACKS AND EVEN BLOODSHED IN
THE PUSH TO WIPE POLIO OFF THE
MAP.
>> THE POLIO CAMPAIGN BEGAN
TO STALL THANKS TO EPIC
FLOODS.
>> POLITICAL TURMOIL AND
RELIGIOUS EXTREMISTS WHO
THOUGHT THE POLIO-- FOUGHT
THE POLIO CAMPAIGN WITH GUNS
AND RUMORS.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE JUST SOME
OF THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Woodruff: OUR LEAD STORY
TONIGHT: THE FURLOUGHS ENDED FOR
SOME FEDERAL WORKERS TODAY, BUT
HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS MORE
STAYED HOME, AND MUCH OF THE
GOVERNMENT STARTED A SECOND WEEK
IN SHUTDOWN MODE.
NEWSHOUR CONGRESSIONAL
CORRESPONDENT KWAME HOLMAN
BEGINS OUR COVERAGE.
>> THE GOVERNMENT IS STILL
SHUT DOWN.
SERVICES ARE STILL
INTERRUPTED.
>> WITH NO END TO THE
SHUTDOWN IN SIGHT, PRESIDENT
OBAMA WAEDRN HOUSE
REPUBLICANS TODAY THEY'RE
WRONG IF THEY THINK HE'LL
CHANGE HIS LONG-STANDING
POSITION.
>> WE'RE TO THE GOING TO
NEGOTIATE UNDER THE THREAT
OF FURTHER HARM TO OUR
ECONOMY AND MIDDLE-CLASS
FAMILIES.
WE ARE HE NOT GOING TO
NEGOTIATE UNDER THE THREAT
OF A PROLONGED SHUTDOWN
UNTIL REPUBLICANS GET 100%
OF WHAT THEY WANT.
>> Reporter: THE PRESIDENT
SPOKE AT FEMA, THE DISASTER
AGENCY WHICH RECALLED 200
FURLOUGHED EMPLOYEES WHEN
TROPICAL STORM KAREN MENACED
THE GULF COAST.
WITH THE STORM OVER AT LEAST
100 OF THOSE WORKERS WILL BE
FURLOUGHED AGAIN.
AT THE SAME TIME DEFENSE
SECRETARY CHUCK HAGEL
ORDERED NEARLY 350,000 OF
HIS CIVILIAN WORKERS BACK ON
THE JOB TODAY TO SUPPORT THE
MILITARY.
>> IRRESPONSIBLE.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE
ORGANIZING FOR ACTION WHICH
GREW OUT OF THE PRESIDENT'S
REECTIELON CAMPAIGN THOUGHT
TO ADD TO THE PRESSURE ON
HELP CANS WITH A CABLE TV AD.
>> NOW TEA PARTY REPUBLICANS
ARE THREATENING AN ECONOMIC
SHUTDOWN, REFUSING TO PAY
OUR NATIONS BILLS, ENDANGERING
AMERICAN JOBS.
>> Reporter: ON SUNDAY HOUSE
SPEAKER JOHN BOEHNER
INSISTED THE PRESIDENT WON'T
GET HIS WAY.
AND ON THE HOUSE FLOOR TODAY
HE CALLED AGAIN FOR TALKS
WITH THE PRESIDENT.
>> NOW THE AMERICAN PEOPLE
EXPECT WHEN THEIR LEADERS
HAVE DIFFERENCES, AND IN A
TIME OF CRISIS THAT WE'LL
SIT DOWN AND AT LEAST HAVE A
CONVERSATION.
REALLY, MR. PRESIDE
CONVERSATION BEFORE OUR
ECONOMY IS PUT FURTHER AT
RISK.
>> Reporter: REPUBLICANS AND
DEMOCRATS DID AGREE ON ONE
THING, A BILL TO GIVE
RETROACTIVE PAY TO FURLOUGHED
FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.
IT AWAITS SENATE APPROVAL
AND THE PRESIDENT SAID HE'D
SIGN IT.
BUT THE GREATEST RISKLOOM S
IN JUST TEN DAYS WHEN THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HITS THE
DEBT CEILING, RUNNING OUT OF
BORROWING AUTHORITY AND
DEFAULTING ON PAYING ITS
DEBT.
TREASURY SECRETARY JACK LEW
SAID SUNDAY HE CANNOT EXTEND
THE DEADLINE ANY FURTHER.
>> I'M TELLING YOU THAT ON
THE 17th WE RUN OUT OF OUR
ABILITY TO BORROW AND
CONGRESS IS PLAYING WITH
FIRE.
IF THEY DON'T EXTEND THE
DEBT LIMIT, WE HAVE A VERY,
VERY SHORT WINDOW OF TIME
BEFORE THOSE SCENARIOS START
TO BE PLAYED OUT.
>> Reporter: TODAY JEAN
SPERLING, A SENIOR
PRESIDENTIAL ECONOMIC
ADVISOR DID NOT RULE OUT
ACCEPTING A DEBT CEILING
EXTENSION OF JUST 2 TO 3
WEEKS.
SENATE DEMOCRATS SAID THEY
WILL INTRODUCE A DEBT
CEILING BILL THIS WEEK WITH
NO OTHER PROVISIONS ATTACHED.
HOUSE REPUBLICANS HAVE SAID
THEY WANT SPENDING CUTS AND
OTHER ADD-ONS INCLUDED.
>> Woodruff: FOR THE
LATEST ON WHAT IS HAPPENING
BEHIND THE SCENES, WE TURN TO
ROBERT COSTA.
HE IS THE WASHINGTON EDITOR FOR
THE "NATIONAL REVIEW," AND JOINS
ME FROM CAPITOL HILL.
ROBERT,
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
WHAT IS THE LATEST?
WHAT ARE YOU HEARING RIGHT
NOW?
>> HOUSE REPUBLICAN LEADERS
HUDDLED TODAY AT THE CAPITOL
AND STILL REMAIN UNDECIDED
ABOUT THE PATH FORWARD, EVEN
IF THE CLOCK TICKS WITH THE
DEBT LIMIT APPROACHING.
THIS MOANS REPUBLICANS
REALLY AREN'T READY TO COME
UP WITH A NEGOTIATION WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMAnd ARE NOT
SURE OF THE PATH AHEAD.
THAT MEANS THE IMPASSE
CONTINUES.
>> Woodruff: WE ARE HEARING
AS KWAME JUST REPORTED, THE
WHITE HOUSE IS SENDING THE
SIGNAL THAT THEY ARE
PREPARED TO ACCEPT A SHORT
TERM INCREASE IN THE DEBT
CEILING.
THAT'S SOMETHING THEY WERE
NOT WILLING TO ACCEPT
BEFORE.
WHAT ARE YOUR REPUBLICAN
SOURCES SAYING ABOUT THAT?
>> MY SOURCES CLOSE TO THE
LEADERSHIP, JUDY, TELL ME
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT PIECE
OF NEWS TODAY.
BECAUSE IF THE WHITE HOUSE
IS WILLING TO ACCEPT A
SHORT-TERM DEBT LIMIT
EXTENSION, MAYBE SPEAKER
BOEHNER CAN BRING THIS TO
THE CONSERVATIVES WITHIN HIS
CONFERENCE AND SAY WE MAY
NOT GET ALL WHAT WE WANT
RIGHT NOW, BUT LET'S HAVE A
SHORT-TERM EXTENSION AND
KEEP THE FIGHT GOING.
>> Woodruff: YOU MENTIONED
SPEAKER BOEHNER.
SO MUCH OF THIS IS FOCUSED
ON HIM.
DESCRIBE SOME OF THE
PRESSURES AROUND HIM RIGHT
NOW?
WHAT IS HE HEARING, WHAT IS
HE DEALING WITH.
>> SPEAKER BOEHNER REALLY IS
A CENTRAL FIGURE RIGHT NOW.
I THINK HE HAS VERY MUCH A
DRY WIT ABOUT HIM.
I SEE HIM EVERY MORNING WHEN
HE HIS BREAKFAST AT PETE'S
DINNER ON CAPITOL HILL.
BUT HE IS STRUGGLING TO HOLD
HIS CONFERENCE TOGETHER, TO
HAVE A GRIP OVER HIS
CONFERENCE.
HE'S BALING WITH A BLOC OF
ABOUT 30 TO 50 CONSERVATIVES
THIS HAVE PROBABLY MORE
INFLUENCE THAN MOST PEOPLE
REALIZE, THEY REALLY SHAPE
THE DIRECTION OF
NEGOTIATIONS WITHIN THE
HOUSE GOP AND THEY ARE
TELLING BOEHNER TO HOLD FIRM
AND NOT NEGOTIATE.
AND THAT'S REALLY SHAKING
WHAT IS HAPPENING WITHIN THE
CONFERENCE.
THEY DON'T WANT BOEHNER TO
EVEN TRY TO CUT ANY KIND OF
COMPROMISE.
>> Woodruff: BUT HE ALSO HAS
MEMBERS WHO, THE REPORTING
IS, WHO ARE NOT COMFORTABLE
WITH THIS STRATEGY.
HOW MUCH PRESSURE ARE THEY
PUTTING ON THE SPEAKER?
>> A LOT OF THE REPUBLICANS
WHO COME FROM SUBURBAN
DISTRICTS, I SPOKE TO JIM
GURLACK, TWO REPRESENTATIVES
REPUBLICANS FROM THE
PHILADELPHIA AREA SAID THEY
WOULD LIKE REPUBLICANS TO
END THE SHUTDOWN AND EXTEND
THE DEBT LIMIT.
AND THEY ARE TRYING TO WHIP
THEIR CONSERVATIVE FRIENDS
BEHIND THE SCENE SAYING THIS
HAS TO END.
THE MESS HAS TO END.
BUT RIGHT NOW WITHIN THE
HOUSE GOP IT'S STILL VERY
MUCH A DIVIDED SCENARIO.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT ABOUT
THE BUSINESS COMMUNITY,
ROBERT?
THERE'S BEEN A LOT OF
REPORTING ABOUT FOLKS WHO
NORMALLY WOULD CONSIDER
THEMSELVES SUPPORTIVE OF THE
REPUBLICANS WHO ARE LETTING
IT BE KNOWN THEY'RE UNEASY
WITH WHAT IS HAPPENING.
THE FACT THAT THE DEBT
SOLING IS IN SOME JEOPARDY.
ARE THEY MAKING THEIR VOICES
HEARD ON THE HILL?
>> THE PROBLEM IS THE WALL
STREET COMMUNITY THAT
USUALLY SUPPORTS THE
REPUBLICAN PARTY, THEY'RE
TALKING TO BOEHNER AND THE
LEADERSHIP BUT IT IS THE
SMALL DOLLAR DONOR, THE
SUPPORTERS OF TED CRUZ AND
OTHER TEA PARTY FAVORITES
ARE REALLY DRIVING THE
DISCUSSIONS ON THE RIGHT
WITHIN THE HOUSE.
BUT THE REAL MOOD ON WALL
STREET IS SPEAKER BOEHNER IS
KNOWN AS A DEAL MAKER.
HE TRIED TO GET A GRAND
BARGAIN IN 2011 DURING ITS
DEBT CEILING TALKS AND THEY
THINK CAN DO IT AGAIN.
THEY THINK THAT WHAT IS
HAPPENING RIGHT NOW IS
POLITICAL FEEDER AND COME
THE DEADLINE MIDNIGHT OF
OCTOBER 16th JOHN BOEHNER
ULTIMATELY, THEY HOPE, WILL
BE ABLE TO CUT A DEAL.
>> Woodruff: SO WHAT IS IT
ITS REPUBLICANS IN THE HOUSE
NEED IN ORDER TO MOVE.
>> THEY NEED A FIGURE LEAF,
A CONCESSION IN THE WHITE
HOUSE.
AFTER HAVING THE
BRINKSMANSHIP ON THE DEBT
LIMIT AND SHUTDOWN THEY
CAN'T GO TO THE TEA PARTY
BASE AND THEY THEY GOT
NOTHING IN RETURN.
THEY WANT A REPEAL OF THE
MEDICAL DEVICE TAX, PERHAPS
TRADE OF SEQUESTRATION CUTS
FOR TRAINED CPI, THE WAY
SOCIAL SECURITY IS
CALCULATED, SOME CONCESSIONS
TO SELL TO REPUBLICANS
AROUND THE COUNTRY.
>> Woodruff: GIVE US A SENSE
OF WHAT IS GOING ON ON THE
HILL.
WE KNOW MANY OF THE MEMBERS
MAY STILL HAVE BEEN OUT OF
TOWN TODAY.
ARE THERE MEETINGS GOING ON
CONSTANTLY?
IS IT ALL IN THE BACK ROOM?
GIVE US A SENSE OF HOW IF
FEELS.
>> SO ALLOTS OF MEMBERS WERE
RETURNING TO WASHINGTON
TODAY.
AND THERE WAS A TORNADO
WARNING HERE IN THE CAPITOL.
AND SO MEMBERS ARE STILL
RETURNING BUT THEY ARE
VOTING IN THE HOUSE TONIGHT
AT 6:30 P.M.
WHAT THEY ARE LOOKING AT IS
THE LEADERSHIP MET AT 1:00,
LATER AT 4:00 AND 5:00.
AND THEY'RE TRYING TO WHIP
SUPPORT BEHIND THE SCENES
FOR SOME BARGAIN.
BOEHNER IS PLOT OG HIS NEXT
MOVE.
HE REMAINS UNDECIDED BUT
SOMETIME SOON, PROBABLY
LATER THIS WEEK, AND PETE
SESSION OF TEXAS TELLS ME
PROBABLY WITHIN THE 48
HOURS.
HOUSE REPUBLICANS HAVE TO
UNVEIL SOME KIND OF DEBT
LIMIT PROPOSAL.
THEY STILL NEED TO DECIDE
WHAT THAT FINAL PRODUCT
LOOKS LEAK.
>> Woodruff: SO HOW CLOSE
DOWN TO THE WIRE CAN THEY
LET THIS GO?
>> I THINK THEY ARE PROBABLY
GOING TO GO TO THE FINAL
DAYS.
AND THAT IS BECAUSE OF THE
POLITICAL PRESSURE FROM THE
RIGHT.
IF THEY DON'T, IF THE
SPEAKER AND THE LEADERSHIP
TO THE CONSERVATIVES DON'T
LOOK LIKE THEY FOUGHT TO THE
END THERE WILL BE
REPERCUSSIONS POLITICALLY
WITHIN THE PARTY.
SO THEY HAVE TO KEEP
FIGHTING.
THAT IS WHAT YOU SAW SPEAKER
BOEHNER ON SUNDAY ON ABC
TALK ABOUT THE NEED FOR A
CONVERSATION THAT AT THE
SAME TIME SAYING WILL NOT
YIELD ANY GROUND.
>> JUST QUICKLY, FINALLY
ROBERT, WE'RE HEARING
TONIGHT IN THE SENATE THAT
THIS PLAN TO PAY FEDERAL
WORKERS WHO HAVE BEEN
FURLOUGHED BACK PAY HAS HIT
A SNAG.
SENATOR JOHN CORNYN OF TEXAS,
DO YOU KNOW ANYTHING ABOUT
THAT?
>> WHAT IS HAPPENING, I
THINK S BOTH PARTIES WANT TO
MAKE SURE THERE IS BACK PAY
FOR FEDERAL WORKERS BUT
SENATE DEMOCRATS, ESPECIALLY
SENATE MAJORITY LEADER HARRY
REID DON'T WANT A DEAL WITH
REPUBLICANS O ON BACK PAY
DURING THIS CONSTANT
HOSTILITY UNLESS REPUBLICANS
COME UP WITH A DEAL TO FUND
THE GOVERNMENT AND EXTENT
THE DEBT LIMITMENT UNTIL
THAT HAPPENS, UNTIL
REPUBLICANS INCH TOWARD THE
CENTER IT IS UNLIKELY TO
HAVE A FINAL DEAL IN THE
SENATE.
>> Woodruff: MEANWHILE IT
ALL WAITS.
>> INDEED T DOES.
I THINK WE'LL KEEP WAITING
UNTIL NEXT WEEK, UNTIL THAT
11th HOUR.
>> ROBERT COSTA, THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> IN OTHER NEWS THE
STALEMATE IN
IN OTHER NEWS, THE STALEMATE IN
WASHINGTON FED THE UNEASE ON
WALL STREET, AND SENT STOCKS
FALLING AGAIN.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST 136 POINTS TO CLOSE AT
14,936.
THE NASDAQ DROPPED 37 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3770.
>> Woodruff: ONE FEDERAL
INSTITUTION DID RETURN TO WORK
TODAY.
THE SUPREME COURT OPENED ITS NEW
TERM BY TURNING AWAY HUNDREDS OF
PENDING APPEALS.
THE FIRST ARGUMENTS OF THE
SESSION COME TOMORROW, WHEN THE
COURT CONSIDERS LIFTING THE
LIMITS ON CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS
BY INDIVIDUALS.
WE'LL HAVE MORE ON THIS AFTER
THE NEWS SUMMARY.
IN IRAQ, COORDINATED EXPLOSIONS
ROCKED BAGHDAD, KILLING AT LEAST
45 PEOPLE.
EIGHT OF THE ATTACKS-- MOSTLY
CAR BOMBS-- STRUCK COMMERCIAL
AREAS IN MAINLY SHIITE
DISTRICTS.
MORE THAN 6,000 PEOPLE HAVE DIED
IN IRAQ THIS YEAR, MOST OF THEM
SINCE THE SURGEF VI OOLENCE
BEGAN IN APRIL.
THE PRESIDENT OF AFGHANISTAN,
HAMID KARZAI, HAS RULED OUT
SIGNING A LONG-TERM SECURITY
DEAL WITH THE U.S. UNTIL
DIFFERENCES OVER SOVEREIGNTY ARE
RESOLVED.
THE PACT WOULD PROVIDE LEGAL
GROUNDS FOR SOME FOREIGN TROOPS
TO REMAIN IN AFGHANISTAN BEYOND
THE 2014 U.S. WITHDRAWAL DATE.
BUT KARZAI SAID TODAY
NEGOTIATIONS HAVE BEEN
DIFFICULT.
.
>> THEY HAVE NOT EXPECTED -- --
WHENEVER THEY HAVE FOUND I
IT-- THAT ACTED AGAINST WE
HAVE --
>>
>> Woodruff: KARZAI SAID HE WILL
CONVENE A MEETING OF AFGHAN
ELDERS IN ONE MONTH TO HELP HIM
MAKE A DECISION.
A SENIOR AL-QAEDA FIGURE IS NOW
ON A U.S. WARSHIP IN THE
MEDITERRANEAN, BEING QUESTIONED
IN THE 1998 BOMBINGS OF AMERICAN
EMBASSIES IN KENYA AND TANZANIA.
HE WAS CAPTURED BY U.S.
COMMANDOS ON SATURDAY IN LIBYA.
A SECOND U.S. RAID FAILED TO
CAPTURE A TOP MEMBER OF AL-
SHABAAB IN SOMALIA.
MORE ON THIS, LATER IN THE
PROGRAM.
EGYPT WAS ROCKED BY NEW KILLINGS
TODAY.
IN SOUTHERN SINAI, A SUICIDE CAR
BOMBER KILLED THREE POLICEMEN
AND WOUNDED DOZENS MORE, AND A
DRIVE-BY SHOOTING KILLED SIX
SOLDIERS OUTSIDE CAIRO.
MEANWHILE, FUNERALS WERE HELD
FOR SOME OF THE MORE THAN 50
PEOPLE KILLED YESTERDAY.
THEY DIED IN CLASHES BETWEEN
SECURITY FORCES AND SUPPORTERS
OF OUSTED PRESIDENT MOHAMMED
MORSI.
TWO AMERICANS AND A GERMAN
RESEARCHER WILL SHARE THIS
YEAR'S NOBEL PRIZE FOR MEDICINE.
THEY WON TODAY FOR DISCOVERIES
ON HOW CRITICAL CHEMICALS MOVE
INSIDE CELLS-- WORK THAT COULD
HELP TREAT DIABETES AND
ALZHEIMER'S.
THE AMERICANS ARE JAMES ROTHMAN
OF YALE AND RANDY SCHEKMAN OF
THE UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA AT
BERKELEY.
SCHEKMAN RECOUNTED THE PHONE
CALL HE GOT THIS MORNING.
.
>> HE SAID THIS IS CALLING
FROM STOCKHOLM AND
CONGRATULATIONS AND WHEN I
REALIZED THAT WAS IT.
AND I-- HI GONE THROUGH THIS
IN MY MIND SO MANY TIMES,
WHAT I WOULD SAY.
AND OF COURSE, WORDS ESCAPED
ME AT THAT MOMENT.
AND I THINK ALL I SAID WAS
OH MY GOD, OH MY GOD.
>> Woodruff: AND THERE'S MORE ON
THIS STORY, COMING LATER.
OPENING STATEMENTS BEGAN TODAY
IN CLEVELAND, IN THE CASE OF AN
ALLEGED $100 MILLION FRAUD
SCHEME THAT CLAIMED TO HELP NAVY
VETERANS.
PROSECUTERS SAY JOHN DONALD CODY
SIPHONED MONEY FROM HIS FAKE
CHARITY AND USED SOME OF THE
MONEY FOR POLITICAL DONATIONS,
BUT LITTLE, IF ANY, BENEFITED
VETERANS.
CODY COULD FACE 40 YEARS IN
PRISON.
ALSO AHEAD ON THE NEWSHOUR, THE
SUPREME COURT KICKS OFF A NEW
TERM; FALLOUT FROM THE TWIN
RAIDS ON TERRORISTS IN NORTH
AFRICA; SETBACKS IN THE FIGHT TO
END POLIO IN PAKISTAN; PUBLIC
POLICY'S IMPACT ON POVERTY
PROGRAMS; AND A NOBEL PRIZE
WINNER'S MOMENT OF JOY.
>> Woodruff: IT'S THE FIRST
MONDAY IN OCTOBER, AND THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT MAY BE SHUT
DOWN, BUT THE SUPREME COURT
OPENED ITS NEW TERM ON SCHEDULE.
RAY SUAREZ TAKES A LOOK AT WHAT
LIES AHEAD.
>> Suarez: THERE ISN'T ONE
SINGLE BLOCKBUSTER CASE ON THE
DOCKET AS IN RECENT SUPREME
COURT TERMS, BUT THE HIGH COURT
WILL CONSIDER A NUMBER OF
WEIGHTY ISSUES.
THE NINE JUSTICES WILL HEAR
CASES DEALING WITH CAMPAIGN
FINANCE, ABORTION, PRAYER IN
GOVERNMENT, PRESIDENTIAL POWER,
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION, AND HOUSING
DISCRIMINATION.
OUR GUIDE FOR THE TERM WILL BE,
AS ALWAYS, MARCIA COYLE OF THE
"NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL."
SHE JOINS ME NOW.
BEFORE WE GET TO THE
NITTY-GRITTY WHY DIDN'T THE
SPROM COURT SHUT DOWN?
>> WELL, OUR FEDERAL COURTS
INCLUDING THE SUPREME COURT
ARE DEPENDENT ON
CONGRESSIONAL APPROPRIATIONS
TO OPERATE.
THE SUPREME COURT SAYS IT
CAN CONTINUE TO OPERATE AT
LEAST THROUGH THE END OF
THIS WEEK WHEN IT WILL THEN
STOP AND EVALUATE.
FEDERAL COURTS HAVE SMALL
SOURCE OF INDEPENDENT MONEY
USUALLY FROM FINES AM BUT
IT'S NOT GOING TO BE ENOUGH
TO CARRY IT THROUGH A
LONG-TERM SHUTDOWN.
BUT THE COURT HAS OPERATED
IN PRIOR SHUTDOWNS AND EVEN
WHEN BLIZZARDS HAVE SHUT
DOWN WASHINGTON D.C.
I THINK THERE'S A QUIET
SENSE OF PRIDE THAT IT
CONTINUES TO DO ITS WORK AND
TO DO IT ON TIME.
>> Suarez: WE MENTIONED AT
THE OUTSET THAT THERE ISN'T
A SINGLE CASE AS THERE HAS
BEEN IN RECENT TERMS.
>> RIGHT.
>> Suarez: BUT A LOT OF
ATTENTION RIGHT OUT OF THE
GATE WITH CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTIONS, I COULDN'T
SPIT IT OUT THERE.
THEY ARE REVISITING WHETHER
MONEY CAN EVER BE REGULATED
AS SPEECH WHEN IT'S BEING
GIVEN TO A POLITICAL
CAMPAIGN.
TELL US ABOUT THE CASE.
>> OKAY, RAY.
WELL, THIS IS A VERY PORN
CASE.
THE COURT BACK IN 1976
APPROVED OF THE WAY CONGRESS
HAD DIVIDED CAMPAIGN
REGULATION BETWEEN CAMPAIGN
SPENDING AND CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTIONS.
IT SAID THAT SPENDING WAS
SOMETHING THAT YOU REALLY
COULD NOT REGULATE, PUT
LIMIT ON.
IT WAS MORE CLOSELY ALIGNED
WITH PURE SPEECH UNDER THE
FIRST AMENDMENT.
AND BUT CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTIONS, EVEN THOUGH
THEY INVOLVE SPEECH THAT WAS
PROTECTED, YOU COULD
REGULATE THAT BECAUSE THERE
IS A GREATER RISK OF
CORRUPTION OR THE APPEARANCE
OF CORRUPTION, OF GIVING
LARGE SUMS OF MONEY DIRECTLY
TO A CANDIDATE OR A
POLITICAL COMMITTEE.
THIS CASE IS ASKING THE
JUSTICES WHETHER THE TOTAL
LIMITS ON WHAT SOMEONE CAN
GIVE IN A TWO-IER ELECTION
CYCLE VIOLATES THE FIRST
AMENDMENT NOW.
THE PROPONENTS OF THIS CASE
ARGUE THAT THE RISK OF
CORRUPTION IS NO LONGER
THERE BECAUSE OF CHANGES IN
ELECTION LAWS OVER THE
YEARS.
AND IT'S TIME TO AT LEAST
LIMIT THE AGGREGATE TOTAL
AMOUNT THAT CAN BE GIVEN.
BUT KEEP IN PLACE THE BASE
LIMIT ITS, LIMITS THAT
SOMEONE CAN CONTRIBUTE
DURING ONE ELECTION.
>> Suarez: SO THIS
WOULD-- HAS THE POTENTIAL
LIKE SO MANY OF THESE CASES
TO REVISITING OR REVISING
WHAT HAS BEEN GUIDING CASE
LAW, GUIDING PRECEDENCE ON
WHICH A LOT OF DECISIONS
HAVE BEEN BASED.
>> IN PARTICULAR THAT 1976
DECISION.
THERE ARE BRIEFS THAT HAVE
BEEN FILED IN THE CASE
AGGRESSIVELY ASKING THE
COURT TO OVERTURN IT.
AND THE RESULT IS GOING TO
BE BASICALLY MORE MONEY IN
CAMPAIGNS IF THE COURT GOES
DOWN THAT ROAD.
BUT LIMITS ON CONTRIBUTIONS,
THE COURT HAS UPHELD THOSE
FOR ALMOST 40 YEARS NOW.
THEY ARE CONSIDERED
SACROSANCT.
WE'LL HAVE TO WAIT AND SEE
IF THE COURT IS WILLING TO
TAKE THAT VERY NEW STEP.
>> Suarez: LET'S LOOK AT
OTHER BIG CASES.
ABORTION GOING TO BE
REVISITED.
>> YES, WE'RE COMING BACK TO
ABORTION.
TWO CASES ON THE DOCKET.
ONE INVOLVES A 35 FOOT
BUFFER ZONE AROUND ABORTION
CLINICS IN MASSACHUSETTS.
BACK IN 2000 THE SUPREME
COURT UPHELD AN 8 FOOT
BUFFER ZONE AROUND CLINICS
IN COLORADO.
HERE AGAIN, THOSE WHO ARE
CHALLENGING THE BUFFER ZONE
ARE SAYING WELL, IF THIS 35
FOOT BUFFER ZONE DOESN'T
COMPART WITH WHAT YOU SAID
IN THE 2000 CASE, OVERRULE
THAT 2000 CASE.
THE SECOND CASE WOULD BE THE
FIRST TIME THE SUPREME COURT
WOULD LOOK AT MEDICAI
MEDICAID-- MEDICATION
ABORTIONS, DRUGS USED TO
TERMINATE A PREGNANCY, FOR
EXAMPLE, RU-486.
THIS INVOLVES AN OKLAHOMA
LAW.
IT IS IN A STRANGE POSITION
BECAUSE THE COURT ASKED THE
OKLAHOMA SUPREME COURT TO
CLARIFY THE MEANING OF THE
LAW.
IT DID WHAT WE CALL
CERTIFIED TWO QUESTIONS TO
THAT COURT.
OKLAHOMA SUPREME COURT
HASN'T ANSWERED YET.
SO WE'RE NOT SURE WHAT THE
COURT'S GOING TO DO WHEN IT
DOES GET THE ANSWERS.
WHETHER IT'S GOING TO GO
FORWARD WITH IT OR NOT.
THAT IS STATE LAW REQUIRES
THE DRUGS TO BE USED
ACCORDING TO THE FDA LABEL.
BUT SINCE THE FDA LABEL WAS
APPROVED SOME 7 YEARS AGO, I
IE SCIENCE HAS
ADVANCED AND THERE IS NOW AN
OFF LABEL USE.
>> Suarez: THE SUPREME COURT
HAS BEEN RULING ON PRAYER IN
PUBLIC INSTITUTIONS FOR HALF
A CENTURY NOW.
BUT THEY HAVE TO DO ANOTHER
ONE NOW.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
THIS ISSUE GOES BACK TO 1983
WHEN THAT SUPREME COURT MET
IN THAT TERM UPHELD
LEGISLATIVE PRAYERS IN A
CHALLENGE BROUGHT TO THE
NEBRASKA LEGISLATURE'S USE
OF PRAYERS AT OPENING
SESSIONS.
THE CASE BEFORE THE COURT
NOW INVOLVES THE TOWN OF
GREECE, NEW YORK, WHICH
OPENS ITS TOWN BOARD
MEETINGS WITH PRAYERS BY
LOCAL CLERGIES.
THE LOWER FEDERAL APPELLATE
COURT FOUND THAT THOSE
PRAYERS WERE PREDOMINANTLY
CHRISTIAN IN NATURE AND THAT
VIOLATED THE ESTABLISHMENT
CLAUSE FOR THE FIRST
AMENDMENT.
SO THE SUPREME COURT IS
GOING TO HAVE TO LOOK ONCE
AGAIN AT HOW MUCH GOVERNMENT
ACCOMMODATION OF PRAYER IN
THE PUBLIC SPHERE IS GOING
TO ALLOW.
>> Suarez: ARE THERE STILL
SOME BIG CASES WAITING TO
FIND OUT IF THEY HAVE BEEN
GRANTED CERT, THAT IS THE
COURT HAS AGREED TO HEAR
THEM.
>> ABSOLUTELY, RAY.
WE MAY SEE THE HEALTH CARE
LAW BACK.
IN FACT I'M ALMOST SURE WE
WILL, BEFORE THE END OF THIS
TERM.
THERE ARE SOME FOR-PROFIT
BUSINESS OWNERS WHO HAVE
CHALLENGED THE MANDATE THAT
THEY PROVIDE HEALTH CARE
INSURANCE THAT INCLUDES
CONTRASENSE.
THEY CONTEND THAT THAT
MANDATE VIOLATES THEIR
RELIGIOUS BELIEFS.
AND THERE ARE TWO CASES
INVOLVING CELL PHONE
SEARCHES BY POLICE, AND
WHETHER THEY VIOLATE THE
FOURTH AMENDMENT OF THE
CONSTITUTION.
>> Suarez: MARCIA COYLE FROM
THE NATIONAL LAW JOURNAL,
THANKS A LOT.
>> MY PLEASURE, RAY.
>> Woodruff: THERE WAS MORE
FALLOUT TODAY FROM THE TWIN U.S.
MILITARY RAIDS ON TERRORISTS IN
AFRICA OVER THE WEEKEND.
>> ELITE DELTA FORCE
COMMANDOS SWARMED THIS CAR
IN TRIPOLI, LIBYA, ON
SATURDAY MORNING.
SNATCHING AN AL QAEDA LEADER
KNOWN AS AN ALL ANAS AL-LIBI.
HE IS WANTED IN THE 1998
BOMBINGS OF U.S. EMBASSIES
IN KENYA AND TANZANIA THAT
KILLED MORE THAN 220 PEOPLE.
NOW HE IS REPORTEDLY ON
BOARD AN AMPHIBIOUS
TRANSPORT DOCK, THE U.S.S.
SAN ANTONIO BEING
INTERROGATED.
9 LIBYAN GOVERNMENT
PROTESTED THE RAID AS DID
AL-LIBI'S BROTHER.
>> OF COURSE THERE WAS AN
ACT OF PIRACY BY A FOR
ENFORCE TO KIDNAP MY
BROTHER.
THEY SHOULD HAVE SUBMITTED A
DOCUMENT TO THE LIBYAN
GOVERNMENT AND PUT MY
BROTHER ON TRIAL HERE.
>> INSTEAD AL-LIBI COULD
FACE A FEDERAL TRIAL IN NEW
YORK WHERE HE WAS INDICTED
IN 2000 FOR 9 EMBASSY
BOMBINGS AND OTHER CRIMES.
IN WASHINGTON TODAY STATE
DEPARTMENT SPOKWOMAESN MARIA
HARF DEFENDED THE U.S.
DECISION TO GRAB HIM IN
TRIPOLI.
>> WE OBVIOUSLY AREN'T GOING
TO GET INTO SPECIFICS OF OUR
COMMUNICATION WITH THE
LIBYAN GOVERNMENT BUT WE
VALUE OUR RELATIONSHIP.
WE SUPPORT THE ASPIRATIONS
OF THE LIBYAN PEOPLE AND WE
WILL CONTINUE THIS STRATEGIC
PARTNERSHIP.
>> Reporter: MEANWHILE A
SECOND RAID UNFOLDED
SATURDAY IN THE SOMALIAN
TOWN.
MEMBERS OF THE U.S. NAVY'S
ELITE SEAL TEAM 6 SEEN HERE
TRAINING WENT AFTER A SENIOR
LEADER OF THE ISLAMIST GROUP
AL SHABAAB.
THE MAN KNOWN AS IKRIMA IS
ALSO ACCUSED IN THE '98
EMBASSY BOMBINGS AND IN
ATTACKS ON AN ISRAELI HOTEL.
AND AIRLINE IN KENYA IN
2002.
THE SEALS RAN INTO A HAIL OF
GUNFIRE AND HAD TO WITHDRAW
WITHOUT THEIR MAN.
STILL, SECRETARY OF STATE
JOHN KERRY SAID SUNDAY IN
INDONESIA THAT IT SENDS A
MESSAGE.
>> THE UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA WILL NEVER STOP IN
ITS EFFORT TO HOLD THOSE
ACCOUNTABLE WHO CONDUCT ACTS
OF TERROR, AND THOSE MEMBERS
OF AL QAEDA AND OTHER
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
LITERALLY CAN RUN BUT THEY
CAN'T HIDE.
>> Reporter: AL SHABAAB HAS
CLAIMED RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE ATTACK LAST MONTH ON A
SHOPPING MALL IN NAIROBI,
KENYA, WHERE 67 PEOPLE DIED.
IT IS NOT KNOWN IF IKRIMA
WAS INVOLVED.
BUT KENYAN POLICE TODAY
RELEASED PHOTOS OF TWO MEN
THEY HAVE IDENTIFIED WHO
WERE PART OF THE ATTACK.
FOR MORE
FOR MORE ON THE MEN TARGETED BY
U.S. SPECIAL FORCES OVER THE
WEEKEND AND THE ORGANIZATIONS
THEY'RE A PART OF, I'M JOINED BY
JEREMY BASH.
HE HAS SERVED AS FORMER CHIEF OF
STAFF TO BOTH THE DIRECTOR OF
THE C.IA AND SECRETARY OF
.DEFENSE DURING THE OBAMA
.ADMINISTRATION.
AND OUR OWN MARGARET WARNER, WHO
HAS BEEN WORKING THE PHONES ALL
DAY.
THANK YOU BOTH.
JEREMY TO YOU FIRST, WHY IS
THE YOORPTED STATES GOING
HALFWAY AROUND THE WORLD TO
TRY TO GRAB TERRORISTS LIKE
THESE TWO MEN?
>> WELL, JUDY, AL QAEDA IN
EAST AFRICA IN THE AL
SHABAAB ELEMENT HERE IS A
THREAT TO THE UNITED STITZ
AND OUR ALLIES.
>> Woodruff: WE MAY HAVE AN
AUDIO PROBLEM WITH YOUR
MICROPHONE SO WE ARE GOING
TO TRY TO FIGURE THAT OUT.
LET'S SEE.
WE'RE OKAY NOW, YOU CAN COPE
TALKING.
>> ALL RIGHT, JUDY, THE AL
SHABAAB ELEMENT-- AND OUR
ALLIES, WE LOOK AT WHAT THEY
PLAN IN THE 1998 TERRORIST IN N.
>> Woodruff: MY APOLOGIES,
WE HAVE AN AUDIO PROBLEM.
WE WILL TRITO GET THAT FIX.
I WILL TURN TO MARGARET.
PICK UP ON THAT.
>> Warner: WHAT JEREMY BASH
WAS SAYING IS THAT AL
SHABAAB IN SOMALIA IS
BELIEVED TO MOSTLY BE REGIONALLY
FOCUSED BUT THERE IS ONE ARM,
ONE WING, ONE FACTION.
AND THIS MANIC RIMA WAS
CONSIDERED A SENIOR
OPERATIONAL COMMANDER.
AND THEY DO HAVE TO SET
THEIR SIGHTS OUT OF SOMALIA'S
BORDERS.
AND WHAT'S MORE, ARE
BELIEVED TO HAVE LINKS TO AL
QAEDA.
SO HE WAS CONSIDERED NOT A
NEW THREAT TO THE U.S.
HOMELAND BUT A THREAT.
IN LIBYA, OF COURSE, AL-LIBI,
ANAS AL-LIBI WHO WAS
CAPTURED THERE, HE HAS AN
INDICTMENT AGAINST HIM FOR
THE, AS YOU POINTED OUT O
THE EMBASSY BOMBING.
>> Woodruff: A LONG-STANDING.
>> Warner: BUT ALSO I'M TOLD
BY FORMER AND CURRENT U.S.
OFFICIALS, IT WAS BELIEVED
THAT IN THIS CURRENT CHAOS
THAT YOU ARE SEEING, IN THAT
PART OF AFRICA, HE WAS
WORKING TO ESTABLISH MORE OF
AN AL QAEDA-LINKED PRESENCE
IN LIBYA.
>> Woodruff: SO JEREMY BASH,
I THINK WE HAVE YOUR
MICROPHONE BACK NOW,
APOLOGIES ABOUT THAT.
>> NO PROBLEM.
>> Woodruff: IS THAT TO SAY
THE U.S. CONSIDERS BOTH OF
THESE MEN DIRECT THREATS TO
U.S. INTERESTS, U.S. SKORT
INTERESTS?
>> YEAH, WHICH SAY SO.
IF WE'RE GOING TO GO HALFWAY
AROUND THE WORLD, AS YOU
KNOW, AND ACTUALLY CAPTURE
OR ATTEMPT TO CAPTURE
SOMEONE, IT'S BECAUSE THEY
POSE A DIRECT AND IMMINENT
THREAT TO THE UNITED STATES
TO OUR INTERESTS, OUR ALLIES
AND POTENTIALLY OUR
HOMELAND.
AND REALLY, WE SEE, JUDY,
THE ESSENTIAL FRONT IN THE
WAR AGAINST AL QAEDA SHIFT
SOMEWHAT FROM THE WESTERN
AREAS OF PAKISTAN TO YEMEN
OVER THE LAST COUPLE OF
YEARS AND NOW AFRICA IS
REALLY A CENTRAL FRONT IN
THE FIGHT AGAINST AL QAEDA.
>> Woodruff: SO WE'RE
TALKING ABOUT A BIG
CONTINENT HERE WITH A LOT OF
TERRITORY, MARGARET.
DOES THAT MEAN, I MEAN WHAT
ARE THE PLACES WHERE THE
U.S. SOWS A THREAT?
>> Warner: WELL, THE U.S. HE
ISS A THREAT, RIGHT NOW, IF
YOU JUST HAD A MAP UP, A LOT
OF THESE GROUPS ARE
OPERATING FAIRLY
INDEPENDENTLY.
IT'S PRETTY SPLIT -- SPLINT
ERRED, AL SHABAAB IN SOMALIA,
YOU HAVE ONE IN NIGERIA, YOU
HAVE THESE VARIOUS GROUP,
MILLISH YAS EVEN IN LIBYA.
YOU HAVE ALL THESE FOREIGN
FIGHTERS AND EGYPTIANS THAT
HAVE RETURNED TO THE SINAI
IN EGYPTMENT BUT ONE OF THE
COMMON DENOMINATORS IS YOU
HAVE HAD ALL THIS UNREST,
GOVERNMENTS ARE WEAKER THAN
THEY WERE FIVE YEARS AGO IN
TERMS OF BEING ABLE TO EXERT
SECURITY CONTROL.
AND THE AREAS ARE EVEN MORE
AWASH IN WEAPONS BECAUSE OF
THE LIBYAN CONFLICT WHICH
UNLEERBD, YOU KNOW, ALL OF
THESE WEAPONS THAT HAVE BEEN
CAPTURED-- SORRY THAT WERE
HELD BY QADDAFI FORCES.
SO ITS CONCERN ON THE PART
OF THE U.S. IS NOT THAT FROM
WHAT I HAVE BEEN TOLD THEY
ARE READY TO ATTACK THE
HOMELAND NOW.
THEY DON'T HAVE THE
CAPABILITY AND MOSTLY THEY
DON'T HAVE THE AIM BUT THAT
INCREASINGLY AS THEY BECOME
MORE AND MORE OF AN
INTERCONNECTED GROUP, IT
COULD POSE MUCH MORE OF A
DANGER, AND THEY DO HAVE
THEIR SIGHTS SET ON U.S.
INTERESTS AND FACILITIES.
>> AND I THINK OUR
EXPERIENCE TELLS US, JUDY,
THAT OVER THE LAST 15 YEARS
SINCE THE EMBASSY BOMBINGS,
IF WE DON'T GO AFTER AL
QAEDA WHERE THEY ARE AND
TAKE OUT THEIR TOP
LEADERSHIP THROUGH
MANHUNTING AND OTHER
DISRUPTIVE ACTIVITIES, THEN
IT'S POSSIBLE AND
POTENTIALLY LIKELY THAT THEY
COULD COME ATTACK US HER ON
THE HOMELAND.
>> BUT THE IDEA OF TRYING TO
CAPTURE THE MAN IN LIBYA,
THEY WERE NOT ABLE TO GET
THE MAN IN SOMALIA.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
>> Woodruff: THAT TELLS YOU
THEY WANT TO INTERROGATE
THESE PEOPLE, THEY WANT
INFORMATION FROM THEM.
THEY JUST DON'T WANT TO
ELIMINATE THEM.
>> I THINK OUR OBJECTIVE IS
TO QUESTION THEM AND GET
INTELLIGENCE.
BECAUSE THE INTELLIGENCE CAN
ACTUALLY INFORM FURTHER
OPERATIONAL ACTIVITY.
AND IT AN OPERATIONAL CYCLE.
YOU COLLECT, YOU ANALYZE,
YOU QUESTION, AND THEN YOU
CONDUCT FURTHER OPERATIONS.
SO THE HOPE IS THAT THESE
OPERATIONS WILL LEAD TO
FURTHER OPERATIONS TO
DECIMATE THE TOP LEADERSHIP
OF AL QAEDA IN EAST AFRICA
AND THOSE FINDING SAFE HALF
THEN NORTH AFRICA.
AND IT'S REALLY UNPRESS
DNTED, JUDY, I WOULD SAY FOR
THE YONTED STATES MILL
TORE-- MILITARY TO OPERATE
UNDER ITS OWN MILITARY
AUTHORITIES TO GO NOT NOT
UNGOVERNED AREAS, WAR ZONES,
AFGHANISTAN, IRAQ, SOMALIA
OR HORN OF AFRICA BUT TO GO
INTO AN URBANNING COMMERCIAL
AREA, IN DOWNTOWN TRIPOLI
AND ACTUALLY TAKE SOMEONE
OFF THE STREET.
THAT TELLS ME NUMBER ONE HE
WAS A VERY HIGH RISK MISSION
BUT HIGH PAYOFF AND HIGH
REWARD.
TWO, THAT WE HAD PRISTINE
INTELLIGENCE AND THREE THAT
WE PROBABLY DID HAVE SOME
COOPERATION FROM THE LUBBIAN
AUTHORITIES.
>> Woodruff: THAT WAS MY
QUESTION, MARGARET.
WAS THERE A QUESTION OF
LEGALITY HERE?
>> Warner: WELL, THAT WAS
ONE OF THE QUESTIONS DEBATED
INTERNALLY, THE LEGALITY
BECAUSE THERE-- THIS IS ONE
OF THE GOVERNMENTS UNITED
STATES HOPES SUCCEEDS BUT
DOES NOT HAVE THE CAPACITY,
CAPABILITY, AND MAYBE NOT
THE WILL RIGHT NOW TO DID AN
OPERATION LIKE THIS.
I AM TOLD THAT THERE WAS AT
LEAST AN UNDERSTANDING OR
DISCUSSION THAT IF THE
LIBYAN GOVERNMENT FAILED TO
TAKE A GUY OUT WHO WAS
HIDING IN PLAIN SIGHT AS
AL-LIBI WAS, THAT THE UNITED
STATES MIGHT ACT ON ITS OWN.
NOW THAT'S ALL REMAINS
MURKY.
THEY DON'T WANT TO EMBARRASS
THE WILL BE YEN GOVERNMENT.
THE TATE DEPARTMENT HAD
CONCERNS ABOUT WHAT THIS
WOULD MEAN FOR THIS LIBYAN
GOVERNMENT OCHL SO THERE IS
A LOT OF DELICATE DIPLOMACY
STILL TO COME.
>> Woodruff: THIS IS A
GOVERNMENT THE UNITED STATES
THEY HOPED WOULD STAND UP
AND BE STRONG BUT IT HASN'T
BEEN ABLE TO DO WHAT THE
U.S. IS COULDN'TING ON.
THE IN SOMALIA, YOU HAVE THE
CASE OF A GOVERNMENT THAT IS
VERY WEAK.
>> VERY WEAK AND IN FACT AL
SHABAAB HAS ACTUALLY BEEN ON
THE RUN BECAUSE SOMALI
FORCES HAVE IMPROVED THEIR
OPERATIONS AGAINST AL
SHABAAB BACKED BY KENYA AND
OTHERS.
BUT IN MANY OF THE AREAS, IT
IS STILL UNGOVERNED.
I ACTUALLY THINK THE
OPERATION IN LIBYA WAS MORE
RISKY THAN THE OPERATION IN
SOMALI.
BECAUSE-- .
>> Woodruff: IN THE HERT OF
THE CITY.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THERE ARE CIVILIANS
AROUND.
AND IKRIMA DOWN ON THE COAST
OF SOMALIA WAS REALLY
SURROUNDED JUST BY MILITANTS
AND FAIRLY OPEN AREA, COON
OF ON THE BEACH.
BUT IN DOWNTOWN TRIPOLI IN
DAYLIGHT WITH WOMEN AND
CHILDREN AROUND, AGAIN TO ME
THAT SHOWED THAT WE HAD BOTH
PRISTINE INTELLIGENCE AND
POSSIBLY THE COOPERATION OF
SOME LOCAL FORCES.
AFTER ALL, HOW DID WE GET
HIM OUT OF THE COUNTRY.
I DON'T KNOW THIS FOR
CERTAIN, I'M NOT IN
GOVERNMENT.
BUT I STRONGLY SUSPECT THAT
WE FLEW HIM OUT TO A NAVY
SHIP TO FLY OUT OF THE
COUNTRY, YOU NEED SOME LOCAL
DOMESTIC SUPPORT.
>> Warner: IT POINTS OUT WHY
A DRONE STRIKE WAS NOT AN
OPTION BECAUSE IT WAS IN
DOWNTOWN TRIPOLI, SO THEY
WANTED TO GET THIS GUY ONE
WAY OR THE OTHER, THE OTHER,
THE-- LETHAL OPERATION
WASN'T AN OPTION.
>> Woodruff: FASCINATING TO
BE HAPPENING HALFWAY AROUND
THE WORLD.
WE WAKE UP SATURDAY MORNING
AND HEAR ABOUT ALL THIS.
MARGARET WARNE
BASH, THANK YOU.
>> THANKS, JUDY.
>> Woodruff: NEXT, DESPITE HUGE
STRIDES TO WIPE OUT POLIO AROUND
THE WORLD, THE CRIPPLING VIRUS
STILL HAUNTS A FEW PLACES.
ONE OF THEM IS PAKISTAN, WHERE
THERE HAVE RECENTLY BEEN A
SERIES OF ATTACKS ON THOSE
TRYING TO ADMINISTER VACCINES.
TODAY, TWO PEOPLE WERE KILLED
AND AT LEAST 12 INJURED AFTER A
BOMB ATTACK OUTSIDE A GOVERNMENT
HEALTH CENTER IN THE NORTHWEST
PROVINCE.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT FRED DE
SAM LAZARO HAS OUR REPORT ON THE
SETBACKS TO ERADICATING THE
DISEASE.
>> Reporter: THIS SLUM IN
KARACHI IS ONE OF THE LAST
PLACES IN THE WORLD WHERE POLIO
IS STILL A THREAT.
PAKISTAN HAD TENS OF THOUSANDS
OF CASES JUST A DECADE AGO, AND
CAME CLOSE TO WIPING IT OUT.
NEIGHBORING INDIA, WITH SIMILAR
OR WORSE CONDITIONS, LIKE URBAN
CROWDING AND POOR HYGIENE, WAS
CERTIFIED POLIO FREE IN 2012.
>> THE FACT THAT THEY'VE DONE IT
IS WHAT MAKES ME THINK THAT WE
CAN DO IT, IF YOU CAN PUT ENOUGH
BOOTS ON THE GROUND AND DO HIGH-
QUALITY CAMPAIGNS, BECAUSE IF
INDIA CAN DO IT, PAKISTAN CAN DO
IT.
>> Reporter: BUT IN PAKISTAN,
DR. ANITA ZAIDI SAYS, THE POLIO
CAMPAIGN BEGAN TO STALL, THANKS
TO POLITICAL TURMOIL, EPIC
FLOODS, AND RELIGIOUS EXTREMISTS
WHO HAVE FOUGHT THE POLIO
CAMPAIGN WITH GUNS AND RUMORS.
AND THERE WAS ONE MORE SETBACK:
THE HUNT FOR OSAMA BIN LADEN, IN
WHICH THE U.S. CENTRAL
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY RAN A FAKE
VACCINE CAMPAIGN TO GATHER
D.N.A. SAMPLES.
>> WHICH HAS HUGELY DAMAGED
PUBLIC HEALTH PROGRAMS, NOT ONLY
IN PAKISTAN, BUT IN MANY, MANY
COUNTRIES, BECAUSE PEOPLE ASK
ALL KINDS OF QUESTIONS.
THEY NOW THINK THAT THE VACCINE
PROGRAMS MIGHT ACTUALLY BE SPY
OPERATIONS.
>> Reporter: IT'S ALSO HELPED
REVIVE A RUMOR LONG FUELED BY
EXTREMISTS THAT THE POLIO
CAMPAIGN IS A PLOT AGAINST
MUSLIMS.
THAT LIE FRUSTRATES BUSINESSMAN
AZIZ MEMON.
HE'S WITH ROTARY INTERNATIONAL,
WHICH HAS SPENT $1.2 BILLION AND
LED THE GLOBAL POLIO EFFORT.
>> THEY ISSUED A BAN ON POLIO
IMMUNIZATION, WHICH IS TODAY
ALSO EXISTING.
THESE ARE THE SAME PEOPLE WHO
WERE REJECTING IT ON THE BASIS
THAT IT WOULD MAKE THE CHILD
INFERTILE.
>> Reporter: SO THE VACCINATION
CAMPAIGN RECENTLY ENLISTED
PROMINENT MAINLINE RELIGIOUS
LEADERS.
>> THE COUNCIL OF ISLAMIC
IDEOLOGY NOW HAS A VERY ACTIVE
PROGRAM, AND THERE IS A
DECLARATION, COUNCIL OF ULEMAS
THAT SAYS THAT THE POLIO VACCINE
IS EFFECTIVE, THAT IT'S NOT
HARMFUL, AND IT IS ALLOWED BY
ISLAM, AND THAT MUSLIM CHILDREN
CAN HAVE IT.
>> Reporter: MUHAMMAD HANIF
TAYYAB HELPED AUTHOR THE
DOCUMENT, WHICH IS BEING
DISTRIBUTED TO MOSQUES ACROSS
PAKISTAN.
>> THEY WILL GO AND EXPLAIN TO
THE PEOPLE, LOOK, IN THE REST OF
THE MUSLIM WORLD, IN IRAN, IN
SAUDI ARABIA, THIS CRIPPLING
CURSE HAS BEEN ERADICATED.
WHY IS IT THAT WE CANNOT
ERADICATE IT FROM OUR COUNTRY?
>> Reporter: THE DECLARATION--
OR FATWA-- BY TOP LEADERS HAS
ENABLED LOCAL IMAMS LIKE BILAL
AHMED TO TELL HIS CONGREGANTS--
MOST OF THEM NOT LITERATE-- THAT
THE VACCINE IS NOT HARAM, OR
ANTI-ISLAMIC.
>> PEOPLE COME TO ME AND THEY
ASK IF IT'S HARAM.
AND I SAY, YOU ALREADY TAKE A
LOT OF OTHER ENGLISH MEDICINES
AND NONE OF THEM ARE HARAM, SO
WHY WOULD THIS ONE BE HARAM?
>> Reporter: SUCH REASSURANCES
HAVEN'T MADE LIFE ANY SAFER FOR
VACCINATORS.
AT LEAST 22 HAVE BEEN GUNNED
DOWN IN THE PAST YEAR OR SO.
>> POLIO WORKERS, THEY LOVE TO
TARGET THEM, NOT JUST BECAUSE OF
POLIO, BUT BECAUSE TOUCHING A
POLIO WORKER MAKES NEWS.
THEY KNOW THAT.
>> Reporter: YOU MEAN THEY'RE
AFTER THE PUBLICITY?
>> YES.
YES, SIR, THEY'RE AFTER THE
PUBLICITY.
>> Reporter: WHO EXACTLY IS
AFTER THE PUBLICITY?
>> THESE TALIBAN GROUPS.
SO YOU KNOW THIS BECOMES
INTERNATIONAL NEWS, ALSO.
>> Reporter: IN KARACHI, WORKERS
WE SPOKE TO-- PAID ABOUT $5 A
DAY-- SAID THEY WERE UNDETERRED.
>> THE SECURITY SITUATION IS
TOUGH ALL OVER THE COUNTRY, BUT
THIS IS SOMETHING WE HAVE TO DO
FOR THE CHILDREN.
>> THIS DISEASE CRIPPLES
CHILDREN NOT JUST FOR A DAY, BUT
FOR THEIR ENTIRE LIVES.
AND IT AFFECTS THE WHOLE FAMILY.
>> WE HAVE TO DO IT FOR THE SAKE
OF THE CHILDREN.
AS WOIM HEALTH WORKERS IT IS
OUR JOB TO HELP KID, POLIO
GENES ARE BEING AING TAD BUT
THIS IS SOMETHING WE HAVE TO
DO --
>>
>> Reporter: THEY FAN OUT ACROSS
CITY NEIGHBORHOODS, SOMETIMESEM,
WHICH HAS NOT STOPPED SOME
ATTACKS.
DIFFICULT AS IT IS FOR
VACCINATORS IN THE CITIES, IT'S
BECOMING VIRTUALLY IMPOSSIBLE IN
VAST SWATHS OF THE NORTH AND
NORTHWEST OF PAKISTAN, WIDE
SWATHS OF WHICH ARE UNDER THE
INFLUENCE OF EXTREMIST
MILITANTS.
THEY'VE DECLARED THE POLIO
CAMPAIGN OFF LIMITS.
SO FOR NOW THE CAMPAIGN HAS
TARGETED BUSES TO AND FROM THE
NO-GO REGIONS.
DR. ZAIDI SAYS THIS WILL, AT
BEST, CONTAIN POLIO, NOT WIPE IT
OUT.
TO DO THAT, SHE SAYS, PAKISTAN'S
MILITARY WILL NEED TO TAKE ON
THE MILITANTS TO ALLOW
VACCINATORS SAFE ACCESS.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT THE NUMBER ONE
PROBLEM OF PAKISTAN RIGHT NOW IS
THAT IT IS TERRORISM.
I MEAN, POLIO IS JUST A
BYPRODUCT OF THIS ISSUE RIGHT
NOW.
THE CENTRAL ISSUE IS FINDING,
FIGHTING TERRORISM, AND IF YOU
ADDRESS THE SECURITY SITUATION,
THE POLIO PROBLEM WILL
AUTOMATICALLY BE ADDRESSED.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE'S ONE
MORE COMPLICATION.
WE SAW IT IN THE SLUM: A SEEMING
PUBLIC INDIFFERENCE
EVEN AS THEY URGED PARENTS TO
BRING CHILDREN OUT TO GET THE
VACCINE DROPS, EVEN AS PEOPLE IN
THIS COMMUNITY INTRODUCED US TO
POLIO VICTIMS WHO LIVE HERE,
IT'S CLEAR MANY RESIDENTS HAD
OTHER PRIORITIES.
VACCINATORS SAY THEY GOT A BIT
OF RESISTANCE TO THE POLIO
CAMPAIGN, BUT MOSTLY THEY GOT
COMPLAINTS.
IT'S ABOUT TO RAIN AND THEIR
SHELTERS ARE FLIMSY.
THERE'S NO CLEAN DRINKING WATER,
NO SANITATION, NO SCHOOLS.
FOR MILLIONS OF PAKISTANIS WHO
LIVE IN CONDITIONS LIKE THESE,
POLIO IS HARDLY THE MOST
PRESSING CONCERN.
SOME HEALTH PROFESSIONALS AND
POLITICAL LEADERS ALSO FEEL
PAKISTAN HAS MORE PRESSING
PROBLEMS.
AFTER ALL, EDUCATION, CLEAN
WATER, AND SANITATION WOULD
REMOVE CONDITIONS THAT SPREAD
THE POLIO VIRUS.
BUT THOSE ARE LONG-TERM
SOLUTIONS.
POLIO CAMPAIGNERS SAY GETTING
SIMPLE DROPS TO ALL CHILDREN
COULD WIPE OUT THE SCOURGE MUCH
SOONER AND REMOVE THE STIGMA
PAKISTAN ENDURES INTERNATIONALLY
AS ONE OF THE FEW EXPORTERS OF
THE VIRUS.
BUT THAT WOULD REQUIRE RESOURCES
AND ACTION, AND NO ONE IS
CERAIN TPAKISTAN'S GOVERNMENT
WILL MAKE POLIO A TOP PRIORITY
NYTIAME SOON.
>> Woodruff: A VERSION OF FRED'S
STORY AIRED ON THE PBS PROGRAM
"RELIGION AND ETHICS
NEWSWEEKLY."
HIS REPORTING IS A PARTNERSHIP
WITH THE UNDER-TOLD STORIES
PROJECT AT SAINT MARY'S
UNIVERSITY IN MINNESOTA.
NEXT, WE LOOK AT QUESTIONS
SURROUNDING THE STRENGTH OF THE
SOCIAL SAFETY NET IN THE UNITED
STATES.
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SHUTDOWN
IS JEOPARDIZING SOME PROGRAMS
IMMEDIATELY, AND IT COMES AT A
TIME WHEN THERE ARE BIGGER
QUESTIONS ABOUT WHOM THE
GOVERNMENT SHOULD HELP.
JEFFREY BROWN HAS OUR LOOK.
>> THEY WERE SINGING LAST
WEEK, BUT TODAY AS FEDERAL
FUNED HDEAD START PROGRAMS
IN AT LEAST NINE STATES
BEGAN TO LAPS, THERE WAS NO
SCHOOL FOR THE CHILDREN AT
THE LITTLE RIVER PRESCHOOL
IN CHEROKEE COUNTY, GEORGIA.
>> THEY'RE ONLY GOING TO BE
THREE ONE TIME IN THEIR LIFE,
OR FOUR ONE TIME IN THEIR
LIFE.
AND SO IF THEY MISS OUT ON
LEARNING DURING THOSE REALLY
IMPORTANT MOMENTS OF THOSE
YEARS, IT WILL IMPACT THE
REST OF THEIR LIFE.
AND SO THIS IS A CRITICAL
TIME FOR THE INTERRUPTION.
>> EVEN AS THE SHUTDOWN
EFFECTS TAKE HOLD, LONGER
TERM FIGHTS OVER SAFETY NET
PROGRAMS CONTINUE.
PROMINENTLY INCLUDING FOOD
STAMPS.
LAST MONTH E HTHOUSE VOTED
TO CUT THE PROGRAM BY 40
BILLION DOLLARS OVER TEN
YEARS.
THE BILL PASSED ALONG PARTY
LINES AFTER HEATED DEBATE.
>> AND MOST PEOPLE DON'T
CHOOSE TO BE ON FOOD STAMPS.
MOST PEOPLE WANT A JOB.
MOST PEOPLE WANT TO GO OUT
AND BE PRODUCTIVE.
SO THAT THEY CAN EARN A
LIVING.
>> AND IF OTHERS, AND THERE
MAY BE SOME, THAT CHOOSE TO
ABUSE THE SYSTEM.
THAT'S NOT OUT OF THE REALM
OF POSSIBILITY, FRANKLY IT'S
WRONG FOR HARDWORKING MIDDLE
CLASS AMERICANS TO PAY FOR
THAT.
>> REPUBLICAN DESIRE FOR
WHATEVER REASON
INCOMPREHENSIBLE TO MANY OF
US TO DEPRIVE EVEN THE
NEEDIEST AMERICANS WITH A
BASIC NECESSITY, FOOD, THIS
BILL WOULD SHAMEFULLY AND
LITERALLY TAKE FOOD OUT OF
THE MOUTHS OF NEARLY $4
MILLION CHILDREN, SENIORS
AND DISABLED.
>> ALSO STILL UNDER SCRUTINY,
OF COURSE, THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT.
SIGNED INTO LAW THREE YEARS
AGO AND INTENDED IN LARGE
PART TO HELP THE NATION'S
POOR AND UNINSURED.
BUT LAST WEEK WHEN PEOPLE
TRIED TO SIGN ON TO HEALTH
EXCHANGE WEB SITES, SOME
FOUND THEY DIDN'T QUALIFY
FOR SUBSIDIES TO BUY
COVERAGE.
MANY WERE SUPPOSED TO BE
COVERED BY AN EXPANSION OF
MEDICAID.
BUT A SUPREME COURT RULING
ALAWED STATES TO OPT OUT OF
THAT EXPANSION AND CITING
COSTS AND OTHER OBJECTIONS,
MORE THAN 20 DID.
AS A RESULT, THE
CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE
ESTIMATES THAT 3 MILLION
FEWER PEOPLE WILL BE
ELIGIBLE FOR COVERAGE UNDER
OBAMACARE.
A RECENT ANALYSIS OF CENSUS
DATA BY "THE NEW YORK TIMES"
FOUND SOUTHERN STATES WERE
HIT HARDEST.
68 PERCENT OF ELIGIBLE
AFRICAN-AMERICANS ARE
EXCLUDED AS ARE TWO-THIRDS
OF ALL SINGLE MOTHERS.
PAUL SWEENEY IS A VIRGINIA
RES DIDN'T STRANDED WITHOUT
COVERAGE.
HE'S AN ADULT WITHOUT
CHILDREN AND UNEMPLOYED.
UNDER THE NEW LAW HE WOULD
HAVE QUALIFIED FOR MEDICAID
BUT HIS STATE OPTED OUT.
>> MEDICAID AND MEDICARE WAS
PUT INTO A SYSTEM TO HELP
PEOPLEUST J LIKE ME.
AND LIKE I SAID, I'M NOT
QUALIFIED, YOU DON'T KNOW
WHAT I WANT TO SAY ABOUTS IT,
YOU KNOW.
IT'S JUST-- THAT'S NOT
RIGHT.
>> HIS DOCTOR SAID SWEENEY
IS JUST ONE OF MANY OF HIS
PATIENTS FACING A TOUGH
PATH.
>> THE VAST MA MAJORITY OF
MY PATIENTS ARE UNINSURED,
MANY UNEMPLOYED, THE OTHERS
WORK LOW-WAGE JOB WAS HEALTH
INSURANCE AND THEY'RE
CERTAINLY NOT ABLE TO AFFORD
THEIR OWN HEALTH CARE SINCE.
SO AND THEY'RE NOT COVERED,
THEY'RE NOT COVERED BY
MEDICAID.
>> SEVERAL REPUBLICAN
GOVERNORS HAVE EXPRESSED
INTEREST IN EXPANDING THEIR
MEDICAID PROGRAMS.
BUT THEIR LEGISLATURES
REMAIN OPPOSED.
FOR SOME
PERSPECT-- PERSPECTIVE WE'RE
JOINED BY JACOB HACKER
HACKER IS A PROFESSOR OF
POLITICAL SCIENCE AT YALE
UNIVERSITY, AND DIRECTOR OF THE
SCHOOL'S INSTITUTE FOR SOCIAL
AND POLICY STUDIES.
HE WORKED ON THE BLUEPRINT FOR
THE HEALTHCARE LAW.
AND STEPHEN PARENTE, A HEALTH
ECONOMIST AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
MINNESOTA.
HE WAS PART OF A TEAM THAT FILED
AN AMICUS BRIEF AGAINST THE LAW
WHEN IT WAS BEING ARGUED BEFORE
THE SUPREME COURT.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
JACOB HACKER LET ME START
WITH YOU AND LET'S START
WITH THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT.
HOW BIG A PROBLEM AND
SURPRISE IS THIS, THE NUMBER
OF PEOPLE NOT COVERED?
>> IT'S A BIG PROBLEM AND IT
IS A BIG SURPRISE AS WELL.
BECAUSE WHEN THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT WAS PASSED, THE
MEDICAID EXPANSION WAS SEEN
AS A CRUCIAL WAY OF REACHING
UNINSURED AMERICANS.
MEDICAID IS LESS COSTLY THAN
PRIVATE HEALTH INSURANCE
THROUGH EMPLOYMENT AND IT'S
BEEN GROWING ITS COSTS HAVE
BEEN GROWING MORE SLOWLY
THAN MANY PEOPLE REALIZE.
IT'S GROWN IN ENROLLMENT BUT
ITS COSTS HAVE RISEN AT
ABOUT THE RATE OF THE GROWTH
OF THE ECONOMY.
SO MEDICAID WAS SEEN AS A
BIG PART OF THE EXPANSION.
BUT WHEN THE SUPREME COURT
RULED MEDICAID EXPANSION WAS
OPTIONAL, A LARGE NUMBER OF
STATE, 26 IN ALL RIGHT NOW
ARE SAYING THAT THEY'RE TO
THE GOING TO MOVE FORWARD.
AND THIS MATTERS BECAUSE
THOSE ARE PRECISELY THE
STATES WHERE MANY OF THE
UNINSURED AND POOR AMERICANS
ARE CONCENTRATED.
AND SO IT'S THE LOW LEVELS
OF HE LEDGE ABILITY FOR
MEDICAID IN THESE STATES
THAT IS THE PROBLEM.
BECAUSE THESE PEOPLE WHO ARE
BELOW 133% OF THE POVERTY
LINE ARE NOT ELIGIBLE FOR
SUBSIDY FORCE PRIVATE HEALTH
INSURANCE THAT ARE AVAILABLE
UNDER THE THE AFFORDABLE
CARE AGO SO THEY'RE LEFT
WITHOUT A COST-EFFECTIVE
OPTION FOR HEALTH INSURANCE.
>> Brown: LET ME ASK STEPHEN
PARENTE, AS YOU SAID, YOU
OPPOSED THE LAW ORIGINALLY.
ARE YOU ARE SURPRISED AS
WELL BY HOW THIS TURNED OUT
AND WHAT CONSEQUENCES DO YOU
SEE?
>> WELL, THE CONSEQUENCES
ARE THAT PEOPLE WILL HAVE
LESS COVERAGE.
I'M NOT THAT SURPRISED AM MI
A LITTLE SURPRISED AT THE
NUMBER OF STATES THAT HAVE
COME OUT.
WHEN WE LOOKED AT THIS
BEFORE WE ESTIMATED IN AN
ARTICLE THAT GOT PUB WILL
BEED IN THE LAST YEAR ONLY
SIX OR SEVEN STATES MIGHT
OPT OUT.
AND SO ITS HE A LARGER
IMPACT THAN EXPECTED.
>> Brown: AS THE LAW ISIC
CANNING IN NOW, WILL
PRESSURES MOUNT ONE WAY OR
ANOTHER ON HOSPITALS, ON
STATES?
WHAT UNUNANSWERED QUESTIONS
DO YOU HAVE IN.
>> THE QUESTION IS WHAT
STATES WILL GIVE IN TO THIS.
BECAUSE THERE'S A LOT OF
MONEY ON THE TABLE.
A HOSPITAL GAVE A DEAL BACK
TO HAVE THE AFFORDABLE CARE
ACT GO FORWARD.
AND THE AMOUNT OF MONEY ON
THE TABLE, IS ABOUT $180
BILLION THAT OTHERWISE COULD
NOT, MAY NOT BE GOING TO
SOME OF THESE STATES.
THE STATE LEGISLATURES AND
GOVERNORS ARE GOING TO FACE
A LOT OF PRESSURE FROM
HOSPITALS.
BECAUSE THEY'RE GOING TO BE
SQUEEZED AS THIS PROGRAM
EXFANNED-- EXPANDS AND NOT
HAVE NECESSARILY THE
REVENUES TO COPE WITH THAT
EXPANSION.
>> Brown: JACOB HACKER WHAT
QUESTIONS DO YOU HAVE?
PARTICULARLY VIS-A-VIS THE
LOW INCOME PEOPLE?
>> WELL, I THINK WE DON'T
KNOW YET WHAT'S GOING TO
HAPPEN IN SOME OF THESE
STATES.
THERE ARE GOVERNORS WHO ARE
PUSHING 20 GO FORWARD.
AND AS STEVE WAS SAYING
HOSTILES ARE GOING TO REALLY
FEEL THE PINCH.
REMEMBER THIS ISN'T JUST THE
UNINSURED.
WHO ARE NOT GETTING
COVERAGE.
BUT IT'S ALSO HOSPITALS THAT
TREAT PEOPLE WHO ARE
UNINSURED WHO ARE NOT ABLE
TO GET REVENUE FOR THAT
CARE.
I THINK THERE'S ANOTHER
QUESTION, A MORE FUNDAMENTAL
QUESTION WHICH IS HOW ARE WE
GOING TO FEEL ABOUT THE FACT
THAT IN HALF THE NATION YOU
HAVE VERY GENEROUS MEDICAID
COVERAGE LEVELS.
ARE YOU GOING TO SEE
EXPANSION A LOT.
BUT IN MANY OF THESE STATES
YOU HAVE TO HAVE INCOME THAT
IS BELOW 25% OF THE POVERTY
LINE TO HAVE COVERAGE.
AND THAT MEANS THAT THERE IS
REALLY, THEY'RE LEAVING THE
MOST VULNERABLE AMERICANS
WORKING 60% OF THE WORKING
UNINSURED, ACCORDING TO THE
"NEW YORK TIMES", OUT OF
COVERAGE.
AND I THINK THAT THAT
IS-- THAT REALLY RAISES SOME
FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS ABOUT
HOW WE DESIGN OUR POLICIES
AND ABOUT HOW WE FEEL ABOUT
THE SAFETY NET AND ABOUT
POVERTY IN OUR SOCIETY,
ESPECIALLY POVERTY AMONG
WORKERS.
>> LET ME ASK YOU, BECAUSE
IT DOES RAISE THE LARGER
SAFETY NET QUESTIONS, BOTH
IN HEALTH CARE AND MORE
BROADLY.
DO WE-- WHERE ARE WE NOW,
WHEN YOU ADD UP THESE KINDS
OF THINGS.
ARE WE A DIVIDED NATION
WHERE SOME STATES PROVIDE
CERTAIN KINDS OF PROGRAMS,
OTHERS DON'T?
WHAT DO YOU SEE?
>> WELL, WE WERE.
>> WHERE WE WERE?
>> WHERE WE WERE EVEN BEFORE
THE SUPREME COURT LAW,
REALLY PROBABLY BEFORE 2008.
DIFFERING STATES HAVE
DIFFERING PREFERENCES ON
WHAT THEY CHOOSE TO EXPAND.
AND SO WHAT THE SUPREME
COURT DID WAS MORE LET'S
LEAVE IT TO THE STATE'S
DECISION TO GO FORWARD.
>> Brown: IS THAT A GOOD
THING?
>> I THINK FROM MY
PERSPECTIVE AS A
CONSERVATIVE IS BECAUSE IF
THAT STATE WANTS TO GO
FORWARD IT CAN, AND IT DOES
IT IN ITS DUE LEGISLATIVE
PROCESSMENT IF YOUR GOAL IS
TO GET AS MANY PEOPLE
COVERED AS CHEAPLY AS
POSSIBLE, MEDICAID EXPANSION
IS THE BEST POLICY OPTION TO
USE.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME, IF YOU
ARE A PATIENT IN ONE OF
THOSE SYSTEMS YOU MIGHT NOT
GET THE ACCESS TO THE CARE
YOU EXPECT.
BECAUSE THE REIMBURSEMENT
RATES FOR THAT VEHICLE IS SO
LOW THAT EVEN THOUGH YOU CAN
COUNT OFF THE NUMBERS AND
SAY WE CHECKED THE BOX, WE
HAVE TECHNICALLY PEOPLE
COVERED, PEOPLE AREN'T GOING
TO BE GETTING CARE.
>> Brown: JACOB HACKER I
TAKE IT YOU DON'T THINK THAT
IS A GOOD THING.
>> NO, I DON'T THINK IT'S A
GOOD THING.
AND I DON'T THINK IT'S THE
CASE THAT MEDICAID IS NOT
PROVIDING GOOD COVERAGE FOR
PEOPLE, I MEAN IF YOU LOOK
AT THE NUMBERS, NOT ONLY IS
IT A COST-EFFECTIVE PROGRAM,
BUT WE KNOW FROM THE
INCREASING AMOUNT OF
RESEARCH THAT HAS BEEN DONE
ON MEDICAID THAT IT PROVIDES
A SUBSTANTIAL AMOUNT OF
FINANCIAL PROTECTION.
I DON'T THINK IT'S A GOOD
THING FOR TWO REASONS.
ONE IS THAT OVER THE LAST
DECADE WE HAVE SEEN A
MASSIVE EROSION OF PRIVATE
HEALTH INSURANCE AND THAT'S
PARTICULARLY TRUE AMONG
PEOPLE WHO WORK IN LOWER
WAGE JOBS.
IF WE WANT TO HAVE AN
ECONOMY THAT IS PROVIDING
PEOPLE WITH BASIC ECONOMIC
SECURITY, IT'S GOING TO HAVE
TO COME THROUGH THIS FAIRLY
COST-EFFECTIVE PROGRAM THAT
WE AS A SOCIETY HAVE
SUPPORTED.
IT'S GOT VERY STRONG PUBLIC
SUPPORT SO I THINK THAT THIS
IS A REAL PROBLEM.
AND ONE THAT WE NEED TO
ADDRESS.
>> Brown: WHEN YOU BROADEN
OUT FROM MEDICAID TO FOOD
STAMPS, TO HEAD START, TO
THE OTHER KIND OF PROGRAMS,
HAS THERE BEEN SO MUCH FOCUS
ON THE MIDDLE CLASS OF LATE
THAT WE ARE NOT PAYING
ATTENTION TO THESE PROGRAMS
OR FOLKS LIKE YOU AND
GOVERNORS, PAYING ENOUGH
ATTENTION, WHERE ARE WE?
>> I THINK THESE THINGS
BECOME POLITICIZED AND TOO
POLARIZED.
I THINK THERE DEFINITELY
NEEDS TO BE A STRONG SAFETY
NET.
I AGREE THAT TOO MUCH FOCUS
HAS BEEN PUT ON THE MIDDLE
CLASS, THAT HAVING A
CONTRACT WITH THE MIDDLE
CLASS RATHER THAN HAIG THE
SAFETY NET BE STRENGTHENED,
RATHER THAN HAVING MEDICAID
AND THE FOOD STAMP PROGRAMS
BE STRENGTHENED TO AVOID
FRAUD IN THOSE PROGRAM, THEY
HAVE TO BE BETTER MANAGED IN
THOSE PROGRAMS.
MEDICAID DOES WORK FAIRLY
EFFECTIVELY.
BUT AT THE SAME TIME IT'S
WORKING EFFECTIVELY BECAUSE
MANAGED-CARE PLANS HAVE BEEN
RUNNING WELL OVER HALF OF
THE MEDICAID PROGRAM FOR THE
LAST DECADE.
THAT'S WHAT REPUBLICAN
GOVERNORS WOULD LIKE TO DO.
IS TO SAY GIVE US BLOC
GRANTS TO CONTINUE THAT
PROGRESS, TO MOVE THESE
PROGRAMS FORWARD AND THEN
WE'LL SEE A BETTER OUTCOME
FOR THE MEDICAID POPULATION.
>> JACOB HACKER, HOW DO YOU
SEE, AND AGAIN MEDICAID,
FOOD STAMPSING ALL OF THESE
SAFETY NET TYPE PROGRAMS
PLAYING INTO WHAT WE'RE
SEEING IN WASHINGTON NOW,
THE KIND OF POLITICS WE'RE
SEEING?
>> WELL, IT'S OBVIOUSLY A
VERY POLARIZED DEBASICALLY I
THINK WE SHOULD KEEP IN MIND
THAT THE REASON THAT WE'VE
SEEN AN INCREASE IN THE
SHARE OF AMERICANS WHO ARE
ON MEDICAID IS BECAUSE OF
THE EROSION OF WORKPLACE
HEALTH INSURANCE.
AND THE REASON WE'VE SEEN SO
MANY MORE AMERICANS ON FOOD
STAMPS IS BECAUSE WE JUST
WANT THROUGH THE GREATEST
FINANCIAL CRISIS SINCE THE
GREAT DEPRESSION.
THE PEOPLE WHO RECEIVE THESE
BENEFITS, THAI THRD-- TWO-THIRDS
ARE THE ELDERLY, DISABLED
AND CHILDREN.
THEY ARE VERY VULNERABLE.
AND FOOD STAMPS ALSO IS A
CRUCIAL LIFELINE IN OUR
ECONOMY.
BECAUSE THOSE BENEFITS GO
BACK INTO OUR ECONOMY AND
ALLOW PEOPLE TO PURCHASE.
SO WE HAVE A LOT OF EVIDENCE
THAT PROGRAMS THAT ARE
PARTICULARLY TARGETED AT
HELPING VULNERABLE CHILDREN
ARE REALLY IMPORTANT FOR
IMPROVING THEIR PRODUCTIVITY,
AND THEIR HEALTH OUTCOMES
OVER THE LIFE COURSE.
AND MEDICAID IS A CRUCIAL
PART OF THAT FOOD STAMPS ARE
A CRUCIAL PART OF THAT.
AND GIVEN THE ECONOMIC
CRISIS WE'VE BEEN THROUGH,
IT'S NOT SURPRISING THAT
MORE AMERICANS ARE RELYING
ON THESE PROGRAMS.
AND I THINK WE SHOULD BE
SAYING RIGHT NOW, YOU KNOW,
WHAT IS-- AS A NATION, IF WE
BELIEVE IT'S A PRIORITY TO
GET OUT OF THIS ECONOMIC
CRISIS AND TO IMPROVE OUR
ECONOMY OVER THE LONG TERM,
WE NEED TO BE INVESTING IN
IMPROVING THE LIFE CHANCE OF
YOUNG AMERICANS WHO ARE
FACING THIS TERRIBLE
ECONOMIC SITUATION.
>> Brown: LET ME GIVE
STEPHEN PARENTE A LAST WORD
ON THAT.
>> IT'S NOT THAT WE DON'T
WANT TO HELP THE YOUNG AND
THE ELDERLY.
WE JUST WANT THE MONEY TO BE
WELL MANAGED AND FOCUSED IN
A PRETTY GOOD WAY.
IF THE RECESSION IS OVER AS
THE PRESIDENT HAS SAID AND
WE'RE MOVING FORWARD, THEN
THE GROWTH OF THIS PROGRAM
SHOULD BE GOING DOWN, NOT
UP.
THAT'S PRINCIPALLY THE
CONCERN THE CONSERVATIVES
HAVE.
>> Brown: STEPHEN PARENTE
AND JAY KOKH-- JACOB HACKER,
THANK YOU BOTH VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT,
THAT MOMENT WHEN YOU WIN THE
NOBEL PRIZE.
JAMES ROTHMAN OF YALE
UNIVERSITY HAD SUCH A MOMENT
EARLY TODAY.
HE AND TWO OTHER PROFESSORS
RANDY SCHEKMAN OF BERKELEY
AND THOMAS SUDHOF OF
STANDFORD WON FOR THEIR WORK
ON HOW CELLS TRANSPORT
ESSENTIAL MOLECULES.
ROTHMAN SPOKE AT A PRESS
CONFERENCE THIS AFTERNOON.
>> TO HAVE MATURED AND
STARTED MY CAREER AS A
RESEARCHER AT A TIME WHEN
YOUR IDEA WAS THE ONLY LIMIT,
ANY RISKS COULD BE TAKEN, NO
MATTER HOW DIFFICULT.
AND I WAS FORTUNATE TO HAVE
TAKEN A FEW OF THOSE RISKS.
AND TODAY'S NOBEL PRIZE
RECOGNIZED YOU KNOW, I GUESS
THE SUCCESS THAT CAME OUT OF
THAT.
IT'S STILL A LITTLE HARD TO
BELIEVE THIS SELL ALL
HAPPENING, I HAVE TO ADMIT.
I WAS ASLEEP, OKAY.
NOW IN PAST YEARS I HAVE NOT
BEEN ASLEEP ON SUCH
OCCASIONS.
BUT THE CALLS DIDN'T ARRIVE.
AS A RESULT, I GAVE UP.
I WENT TO SLEEP VERY NICELY.
AND A FRIENDLY SWEDISH VOICE
BEGAN THE CONVERSATION AND
PROFESSOR HANSAN, THE
SECRETARY OF THE NOBEL
COMMITTEE WAS KIND ENOUGH TO
INFM ORME, AND I TRIED TO
KEEP MYSELF ON THE GROUND,
THAT I WAS A RECIPIENT OF
THIS YEAR'S NOBEL PRIZE.
SO THAT CALL WAS-- WAS AN
OTHER OUT OF BODY
EXPERIENCE.
I COULD SEE THAT IT WAS
HAPPENING, YES, YES, YOU
HAVE RECEIVED THE NOBEL
PRIZE AND ALL THAT.
I HAVEN'T QUITE DIGESTED IT
YET TO BE HONEST.
>> Woodruff: THE NOBEL
COMMITTEE SAID THE WORK DONE
BY ROTHMAN AND THE OTHER TWO
SCIENTISTS PROVED CRITICAL
IN UNDERSTANDING WHAT GOES
WRONG WHEN THINGS ARE
DISRUPTED.
THOSE DISRUPTIONS CONTRIBUTE
TO NEUROLOGICAL DISEASES AND
IMMUNE DISORDERS.
OR AS THE COMMITTEE PUT IT,
QUOTE, MOLECULES HAVE TO BE
DELIVERED TO OTHER PLACES AT
EXACTLY THE RIGHT MOMENT.
TIMING AND LOCATION ARE
EVERYTHING.
AGAIN, THE OTHER MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY.
THE SHUTDOWN OF MUCH OF THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ENTERED A
SECOND WEEK, WITH NO SIGN OF
MOVEMENT TO BREAK THE POLITICAL
STALEMATE.
WALL STREET DIPPED AGAIN, OVER
WORRIES ABOUT THE STANDOFF IN
WASHINGTON.
THE DOW INDUSTRIALS LOST ANOTHER
136 POINTS.
AND THE SUPREME COURT'S NEW TERM
BEGAN.
THE COURT HEARS ARGUMENTS
TOMORROW ON THE FIRST MAJOR CASE
OF THE TERM, LIFTING LIMITS ON
INDIVIDUAL CAMPAIGN
CONTRIBUTIONS.
ONLINE, FINDING WAYS TO DELAY
THE AGING PROCESS, WHICH WOULD
NOT ONLY MAKE PEOPLE FEEL AND
LOOK BETTER, BUT COULD ALSO SAVE
THE U.S. TRILLIONS IN THE LONG
RUN.
READ ABOUT A NEW STUDY FROM
HEALTH AFFAIRS, ON THE RUNDOWN.
AND SEE HOW A SOLAR-POWERED HOME
OR.IGNED AND BUILT BY COLLEGE
WE HAVE A VIDEO ON OUR HOMEPAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR WEB
SITE, newshour.pbs.org.
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON TUESDAY, WE'LL LOOK AT
ARGUMENTS IN A MAJOR CAMPAIGN
FINANCE CASE BEFORE THE SUPREME
COURT.
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
ON BEHALF OF ALL OF US AT THE
PBS NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU, AND
GOOD NIGHT.